README.md, before:

# LoopScheduler

A customizable and extensible framework for game loop architecture.

# Structure

- **[./LoopScheduler](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/LoopScheduler):** LoopScheduler source files
- **[./Lab](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Lab):** Code to test C++ features
- **[./Tests](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests):** Test and evaluation code
- **[./Tests/Results](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests/Results):** Test and evaluation results
- **[./Tests/combined_test_inputs](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests/combined_test_inputs):** Some test inputs for combined_test

# Introduction

LoopScheduler is a simple framework to create desired loop architectures for games.
The main classes in this project are:

  - Loop
  - Group

The main concepts are described here, more details are available in the code documentation.

## Loop

A Loop object contains a Group as its root architecture.
This Group is used to schedule the next task.
The Loop object, runs loops in different threads and runs tasks from the root Group.

## Group

Group is an abstract class.
A Group object, may contain other Groups or objects that can run tasks.
This class has the responsibility of scheduling its own members/tasks, while its Group members schedule their own members/tasks.
Simply, a Group decides what to run next.
Different types of Groups can be implemented.
There are 2 simple Groups implemented in this project:

  - ParallelGroup
  - SequentialGroup

Both of these groups can have Group members and members of Module type.

### Module

The main methods in this class are:

  - GetRunningToken(): Used by Groups to run the module.
  - OnRun(): A virtual method that has to be implemented by the derived class.
  - HandleException(...): A virtual method to handle exceptions that is optional to implement.
  - Idle(...): Used by the module itself to idle and let the other tasks run in the meanwhile.

Each Module object has 2 TimeSpanPredictor objects to predict its higher and lower timespans.
The default predictors can be replaced with other predictors using the Module's constructor.
Also, whether a Module can run in parallel (to itself) can be set using the constructor.
For example:

```
class MyModule : LoopScheduler::Module
{
    MyModule() : LoopScheduler::Module(
                    CAN_MY_MODULE_RUN_IN_PARALLEL,
                    MyHigherTimeSpanPredictor(),
                    MyLowerTimeSpanPredictor()
                )
    {...}

    virtual void OnRun() override {...}
}
```

### ParallelGroup

Runs its members in parallel.
Some specified members can run more than once per iteration while some tasks take longer to finish.

### SequentialGroup

Runs its members sequentially.
A member cannot start its tasks until the previous member finishes its jobs.
A single Group member is allowed to run its own members in parallel.

# Build

CMake can be used to build the tests.
There are also clang++ commands at the start of the executable source files
inside [./Tests](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests)
and [./Lab](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Lab) directories.

To build using CMake on Linux:

  1. Install cmake, make and a C++ compiler using the package manager.
  2. Choose/create a build folder and navigate to there in terminal.
  3. Enter `cmake <project-path> -DLOOPSCHEDULER_BUILD_TESTS=ON && make`,
     replace `<project-path>` with the project's root directory where CMakeLists.txt exists, include `-DLOOPSCHEDULER_BUILD_TESTS=ON` to build the tests.
     The test executables will be in the Tests folder where the commands were executed.

Or simply:

  2. Navigate to the project's root folder in terminal.
  3. Enter these commands:

  ```
  mkdir Build
  cd Build
  cmake .. -DLOOPSCHEDULER_BUILD_TESTS=ON && make
  ```

To build using CMake on Windows:

  1. Download and install CMake from: https://cmake.org/download/
  2. Open the project in CMake and enable the LOOPSCHEDULER_BUILD_TESTS option to build the tests.
  3. Generate the project for an IDE and use the supported IDE to build.

The static library will be built to be used in another CMake project or to be linked.
See an example of CMake linking in [./Tests/CMakeLists.txt](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/blob/main/Tests/CMakeLists.txt).

# Get started

Here are some examples to get an idea of how to use LoopScheduler.

## Include

To use LoopScheduler, include: [./LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler.h](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/blob/main/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler.h)

## Implementing a simple Module

```
class MyModule : LoopScheduler::Module
{
    virtual void OnRun() override
    {
        // Idle for about 0.1s
        Idle(0.1);
        // Do anything
    }
}
```

## Setting up a Loop with a ParallelGroup

```
void SetupAndRun()
{
    // Prepare ParallelGroup members:
    std::vector<LoopScheduler::ParallelGroupMember> parallel_members;

    // Create the first member:
    auto member1 = LoopScheduler::ParallelGroupMember(
        std::make_shared<MyModule>()
    );
    // Add to the vector:
    parallel_members.push_back(member1);

    // Prepare the second member, as one that can run more than once per iteration (with 1 run share per extra iteration):
    auto member2 = LoopScheduler::ParallelGroupMember(
        std::make_shared<MyModule>(), 1
    );
    parallel_members.push_back(member2);

    // Create the ParallelGroup:
    std::shared_ptr<LoopScheduler::ParallelGroup> parallel_group(new LoopScheduler::ParallelGroup(parallel_members));

    // Alternatively:
    auto parallel_group_alt = std::make_shared<LoopScheduler::ParallelGroup>(parallel_members);

    // Prepare the loop
    LoopScheduler::Loop loop(parallel_group);

    // Run the loop (blocks until stopped)
    loop.Run();
}
```

## Important note on smart pointers

Make sure to never use `std::shared_ptr` in 2 objects pointing at each other.
This will cause a memory leak.
It is recommended to use `std::weak_ptr` when possible, or simple pointers combined with code to handle object destruction, to access peers.

# Test

The 2 evaluate executables are used to evaluate the performance.
To test the behavior, use combined_test to run one of the 2 pre-defined tests or create and run a custom test.
combined_test offers 3 options initially:

  1. Test 1: A pre-defined test used as an example of how LoopScheduler works.
  2. Test 2: Tests whether adding 1 module to 2 groups throws an exception.
  3. Custom test: Allows to configure and run a custom defined loop.
     [./Tests/combined_test_inputs](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests/combined_test_inputs) contains some examples.

The test results are manually verified except the pre-defined test2.
Some test inputs are available in [./Tests/combined_test_inputs](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests/combined_test_inputs).
To try them, copy the lines under "Input:", run combined_test and paste them into the command-line interface.

# Contributing

Before contributing to this project, please open an issue and discuss the change you wish to make.
The code in this repository is meant to be kept as simple as possible and might be expanded in future work separately.
More complex Groups and TimeSpanPredictors are possible, but this project is not meant to include them.

Commit message:

Add game loop architecture recommendations

README.md, after:

# LoopScheduler

A customizable and extensible framework for game loop architecture.

# Structure

- **[./LoopScheduler](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/LoopScheduler):** LoopScheduler source files
- **[./Lab](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Lab):** Code to test C++ features
- **[./Tests](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests):** Test and evaluation code
- **[./Tests/Results](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests/Results):** Test and evaluation results
- **[./Tests/combined_test_inputs](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests/combined_test_inputs):** Some test inputs for combined_test

# Introduction

LoopScheduler is a simple framework to create desired loop architectures for games.
The main classes in this project are:

  - Loop
  - Group

The main concepts are described here, more details are available in the code documentation.

## Loop

A Loop object contains a Group as its root architecture.
This Group is used to schedule the next task.
The Loop object, runs loops in different threads and runs tasks from the root Group.

## Group

Group is an abstract class.
A Group object, may contain other Groups or objects that can run tasks.
This class has the responsibility of scheduling its own members/tasks, while its Group members schedule their own members/tasks.
Simply, a Group decides what to run next.
Different types of Groups can be implemented.
There are 2 simple Groups implemented in this project:

  - ParallelGroup
  - SequentialGroup

Both of these groups can have Group members and members of Module type.

### Module

The main methods in this class are:

  - GetRunningToken(): Used by Groups to run the module.
  - OnRun(): A virtual method that has to be implemented by the derived class.
  - HandleException(...): A virtual method to handle exceptions that is optional to implement.
  - Idle(...): Used by the module itself to idle and let the other tasks run in the meanwhile.

Each Module object has 2 TimeSpanPredictor objects to predict its higher and lower timespans.
The default predictors can be replaced with other predictors using the Module's constructor.
Also, whether a Module can run in parallel (to itself) can be set using the constructor.
For example:

```
class MyModule : LoopScheduler::Module
{
    MyModule() : LoopScheduler::Module(
                    CAN_MY_MODULE_RUN_IN_PARALLEL,
                    MyHigherTimeSpanPredictor(),
                    MyLowerTimeSpanPredictor()
                )
    {...}

    virtual void OnRun() override {...}
}
```

### ParallelGroup

Runs its members in parallel.
Some specified members can run more than once per iteration while some tasks take longer to finish.

### SequentialGroup

Runs its members sequentially.
A member cannot start its tasks until the previous member finishes its jobs.
A single Group member is allowed to run its own members in parallel.

# Build

CMake can be used to build the tests.
There are also clang++ commands at the start of the executable source files
inside [./Tests](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests)
and [./Lab](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Lab) directories.

To build using CMake on Linux:

  1. Install cmake, make and a C++ compiler using the package manager.
  2. Choose/create a build folder and navigate to there in terminal.
  3. Enter `cmake <project-path> -DLOOPSCHEDULER_BUILD_TESTS=ON && make`,
     replace `<project-path>` with the project's root directory where CMakeLists.txt exists, include `-DLOOPSCHEDULER_BUILD_TESTS=ON` to build the tests.
     The test executables will be in the Tests folder where the commands were executed.

Or simply:

  2. Navigate to the project's root folder in terminal.
  3. Enter these commands:

  ```
  mkdir Build
  cd Build
  cmake .. -DLOOPSCHEDULER_BUILD_TESTS=ON && make
  ```

To build using CMake on Windows:

  1. Download and install CMake from: https://cmake.org/download/
  2. Open the project in CMake and enable the LOOPSCHEDULER_BUILD_TESTS option to build the tests.
  3. Generate the project for an IDE and use the supported IDE to build.

The static library will be built to be used in another CMake project or to be linked.
See an example of CMake linking in [./Tests/CMakeLists.txt](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/blob/main/Tests/CMakeLists.txt).

# Get started

Here are some examples to get an idea of how to use LoopScheduler.

## Include

To use LoopScheduler, include: [./LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler.h](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/blob/main/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler.h)

## Implementing a simple Module

```
class MyModule : LoopScheduler::Module
{
    virtual void OnRun() override
    {
        // Idle for about 0.1s
        Idle(0.1);
        // Do anything
    }
}
```

## Setting up a Loop with a ParallelGroup

```
void SetupAndRun()
{
    // Prepare ParallelGroup members:
    std::vector<LoopScheduler::ParallelGroupMember> parallel_members;

    // Create the first member:
    auto member1 = LoopScheduler::ParallelGroupMember(
        std::make_shared<MyModule>()
    );
    // Add to the vector:
    parallel_members.push_back(member1);

    // Prepare the second member, as one that can run more than once per iteration (with 1 run share per extra iteration):
    auto member2 = LoopScheduler::ParallelGroupMember(
        std::make_shared<MyModule>(), 1
    );
    parallel_members.push_back(member2);

    // Create the ParallelGroup:
    std::shared_ptr<LoopScheduler::ParallelGroup> parallel_group(new LoopScheduler::ParallelGroup(parallel_members));

    // Alternatively:
    auto parallel_group_alt = std::make_shared<LoopScheduler::ParallelGroup>(parallel_members);

    // Prepare the loop
    LoopScheduler::Loop loop(parallel_group);

    // Run the loop (blocks until stopped)
    loop.Run();
}
```

## Important note on smart pointers

Make sure to never use `std::shared_ptr` in 2 objects pointing at each other.
This will cause a memory leak.
It is recommended to use `std::weak_ptr` when possible, or simple pointers combined with code to handle object destruction, to access peers.

# Recommendations for game loop architecture

An ideal loop for a resource demanding game would be a ParallelGroup with modules that can run more than once and can handle the synchronization.
This way no module can be a bottleneck, this is important because different computers may have different bottlenecks.
Other loop architectures can be designed for less demanding games to make the implementation of modules easier.

It's recommended to do IO tasks like reading files in a single module that cannot run in parallel, that means in a single thread.
Doing them in multiple theads doesn't improve performance and may introduce stutters.

# Test

The 2 evaluate executables are used to evaluate the performance.
To test the behavior, use combined_test to run one of the 2 pre-defined tests or create and run a custom test.
combined_test offers 3 options initially:

  1. Test 1: A pre-defined test used as an example of how LoopScheduler works.
  2. Test 2: Tests whether adding 1 module to 2 groups throws an exception.
  3. Custom test: Allows to configure and run a custom defined loop.
     [./Tests/combined_test_inputs](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests/combined_test_inputs) contains some examples.

The test results are manually verified except the pre-defined test2.
Some test inputs are available in [./Tests/combined_test_inputs](https://github.com/LoopScheduler/LoopScheduler/tree/main/Tests/combined_test_inputs).
To try them, copy the lines under "Input:", run combined_test and paste them into the command-line interface.

# Contributing

Before contributing to this project, please open an issue and discuss the change you wish to make.
The code in this repository is meant to be kept as simple as possible and might be expanded in future work separately.
More complex Groups and TimeSpanPredictors are possible, but this project is not meant to include them.
